
## [HOME](scrolls/home)

# Part I, Section II.

## Dream And Myth Interpretation.


[Readers versed in Freud’s psychoanalysis are requested to pass over this
chapter as they will find only familiar matter.]

In the narrative which we have just examined its dream-like character is
quite noticeable. On what does it depend? Evidently the Parable must bear
marks that are peculiar to the dream. In looking for correspondences we
discover them even upon superficial examination.

Most noticeable is the complete and sudden change of place. The wanderer,
as I will hereafter call the narrator of the parable, sees himself
immediately transported from the place near the lion’s den to the top of a
wall, and does not know how he has come there. Later he comes down just as
suddenly. And in still other parts of the story there occurs just as rapid
changes of scene as one is accustomed to in dreams. Characteristic also is
the fact that objects change or vanish; the shift of scene resembles also,
as often in a dream, a complete transformation. Thus, for instance, as
soon as the wanderer has left the wall, it vanishes without leaving a
trace, as if it had never been. A similar change is also required in the
garden scene where, instead of the previously observed enclosing-wall, a
low hedge appears in a surprising manner.

Further, we are surprised by instances of knowledge without perception.
Often in a dream one knows something without having experienced it in
person. We simply know, without knowing how, that in such a house
something definite and full of mystery has happened; or we know that this
man, whom we see now for the first time, is called so and so; we are in
some place for the first time but know quite surely that there must be a
fountain behind that wall to which for any reason we have to go, etc. Such
unmediated knowledge occurs several times in the parable. In the beginning
of the narrative the wanderer, although a stranger, knows that the lovely
meadow is called by its inhabitants Pratum felicitatis. He knows
intuitively the name of one of the men unknown to him. In the garden scene
he knows, although he has noticed only the young men, that some young
women (whom on account of the nature of the place he cannot then see) are
desirous of going into the garden to these young men. One might say that
all this is merely a peculiarity of the representation inasmuch as the
author has for convenience, or on account of lack of skill, or for
brevity, left out some connecting link which would have afforded us the
means of acquiring this unexplained knowledge. The likeness to the dream
therefore would in that case be inadmissible. To this objection it may be
replied, that the dream does exactly like the author of the parable. Our
study is chiefly concerned with the product of the fancy and forces us to
the observation (whatever may be the cause of it) that the parable and the
dream life have certain “peculiarities of representation” in common.

In contrast to the miraculous knowledge we find in the dream a peculiar
unsureness in many things, particularly in those which concern the
personality of the wanderer. When the elders inform the wanderer that he
must marry the woman that he has taken, he does not know clearly whether
the matter at all concerns him or not; a remarkable fluctuation in his
attitude takes place. We wonder whether he has taken on the rôle of the
bridegroom or, quite the reverse, the bridegroom has taken the wanderer’s.
We are likewise struck by similar uncertainties, like those during the
walk on top of the wall where the wanderer is followed by some one, of
whom he does not know whether it is a man or a woman. Here belong also
those passages of the narrative introduced by the wanderer with “as if,”
etc. In the search for the gardener’s house he chances upon many people
and “it seems” that he has himself done what these people are there doing.

Quite characteristic also are the different obstructions and other
difficulties placed in the path of the wanderer. Even in the first
paragraph of the narrative we hear that he is startled, would gladly turn
back, but cannot because a strong wind prevents him. On top of the wall
the railing makes his progress difficult; on other occasions a wall, or a
door. The first experience, especially, recalls those frequent occurrences
in dreams where, anxiously turning in flight or oppressed by tormenting
haste, we cannot move. In connection with what is distressing and
threatening, as described in the precipitous slope of the wall and the
narrow plank by the mill, belong also the desperate tasks and
demands—quite usual in dreams and myths—that meet the wanderer. Among such
tasks or dangers I will only mention the severe examination by the elders,
the struggle with the lion, the obligation to marry, and the burden of
responsibility for the nuptial pair, all of which cause the wanderer so
much anxiety.

Among the evident dream analogies belongs finally (without, however,
completing my list of them) the peculiar logic that appears quite
conventional to the wanderer or the dreamer, but seldom satisfies the
reader or the careful reasoner. As examples, I mention that the dead lion
will be called to life again if the wanderer marries the woman that he
recently took; and that they put the two lovers that they want to punish
for incest, after they have carefully removed all the clothes from their
bodies, into a prison where these lovingly embrace.

So much for the external resemblances of the parable with the dream life.
The deeper affinity which can be shown in its innermost structure will
first appear in the psychoanalytic treatment. And now it will be advisable
for me to give readers not intimately acquainted with dream psychology
some information concerning modern investigations in dream life and in
particular concerning psychoanalytic doctrines and discoveries. Naturally
I can do this only in the briefest manner. For a more thorough study I
must refer the reader to the work of Freud and his school. The most
important books are mentioned in the bibliography at the end.

Modern scientific investigation of dreams, in which Freud has been a
pioneer, has come to the conclusion, but in a different sense from the
popular belief, that dreams have a significance. While the popular belief
says that they foretell something of the future, science shows that they
have a meaning that is present in the psyche and determined by the past.
Dreams are then, as Freud’s results show, always wish phantasies. [I give
here only exposition, not criticism. My later application of
psychoanalysis will show what reservations I make concerning Freud’s
doctrines.] In them wishes, strivings, impulses work themselves out,
rising to the surface from the depths of the soul. When they come in
waking life, wish phantasies are sometimes called castles in the air. In
dreams we have the fulfillment of wishes that are not or cannot be
fulfilled.

But the impulses that the dreams call up are principally such wishes and
impulses as we cannot ourselves acknowledge and such as in a waking state
we reject as soon as they attempt to announce themselves, as for instance,
animal tendencies or such sexual desires as we are unwilling to admit, and
also suppressed or “repressed” impulses. As a result of being repressed
they have the peculiarity of being in general inaccessible to
consciousness. [Freud speaks particularly of crassly egoistic actuations.
The criminal element in them is emphasized by Stekel.]

One not initiated into dream analysis may object that the obvious evidence
is against this theory. For the majority of dreams picture quite
inoffensive processes that have nothing to do with impulses and passions
which are worthy of rejection on either moral or other grounds. The
objection appears at first sight to be well founded, but collapses as soon
as we learn that the critical power of morality, which does not desert us
by day, retains by night a part of its power; and that therefore the
fugitive impulses and tendencies that seek the darkness and dare not come
forth by day, dare not even at night unveil their true aspect but have to
approach, as it were, in costumes, or disguised as symbols or allegories,
in order to pass unchallenged. The superintending power, that I just now
called the power of morality, is compared very pertinently to a censor.
What our psyche produces is, so to speak, subjected to a censor before it
is allowed to emerge into the light of consciousness. And if the fugitive
elements want to venture forth they must be correspondingly disguised, in
order to pass the censor. Freud calls this disguising or paraphrasing
process the dream disfigurement. The literal is thereby displaced by the
figurative, an allusion intimated through a nebulous atmosphere. Thus, in
the following example, an unconscious death wish is exhibited. In the
examination of a lady’s dream it struck me that the motive of a dead child
occurred repeatedly, generally in connection with picnics. During an
analysis the lady observed that when she was a girl the children, her
younger brothers and sisters, were often the obstacles when it was
proposed to have a party or celebration or the like. The association
Kinder (= children) Hinderniss (= obstacle) furnished the key to a
solution of the stereotyped dream motive. As further indications showed,
it concerned the children of a married man whom she loved. The children
prevented the man separating from his wife in order to marry the lady. In
waking life she would not, of course, admit a wish for the death of the
embarrassing children, but in dreams the wish broke through and
represented the secretly wished situation. The children are dead and
nothing now stands in the way of the “party” or the celebration (wedding).
The double sense of the word “party” is noticeable. (In German “eine
Partie machen” means both to go on an excursion and to make a matrimonial
match.) Such puns are readily made use of by dreams, in order to make the
objectionable appear unobjectionable and so to get by the censor.

Psychoanalytic procedure, employed in the interpretation of dreams of any
person can be called a scientifically organized confession that traces out
with infinite patience even to the smallest ramifications, the spiritual
inventory of what was tucked away in the mind of the person undergoing it.
Psychoanalysis is used in medical practice to discover and relieve the
spiritual causes of neurotic phenomena. The patient is induced to tell
more and more, starting from a given point, thereby going into the most
intimate details, and yet we are aware, in the network of outcropping
thoughts and memories, of certain points of connection, which have
dominating significance for the affective life of the person being
studied. Here the path begins to be hard because it leads into the
intimately personal. The secret places of the soul set up a powerful
opposition to the intruder, even without the purposive action of the
patient. Right there are, however, so to speak, the sore spots (pathogenic
“complexes”) of the psyche, towards which the research is directed. Firmly
advancing in spite of the limitations, we lay bare these roots of the soul
that strive to cling to the unconscious. Those are the disfigured elements
just mentioned; all of the items of the spiritual inventory from which the
person in question has toilsomely “worked himself out” and from which he
supposes himself free. They must be silent because they stand in some
contradictory relation to the character in which the person has clothed
himself; and if they, the subterranean elements still try to announce
themselves, he hurls them back immediately into their underworld; he
allows himself to think of nothing that offends too much his attitudes,
his morality and his feelings. He does not give verbal expression to the
disturbers of the peace that dwell in his heart of hearts.

The mischief makers are, however, merely repressed, not dead. They are
like the Titans [On this similarity rests the psychologic term “titanic,”
used frequently by me in what follows.] which were not crushed by the gods
of Olympus, but only shut up in the depths of Tartarus. There they wait
for the time when they can again arise and show their faces in daylight.
The earth trembles at their attempts to free themselves. Thus the titanic
forces of the soul strive powerfully upward. And as they may not live in
the light of consciousness they rave in darkness. They take the main part
in the procreation of dreams, produce in some cases hysterical symptoms,
compulsion ideas and acts, anxiety neuroses, etc. The examination of these
psychic disturbances is not without importance for our later researches.

Psychoanalysis, which has not at any time been limited to medical
practice, but soon began with its torch to illumine the activity of the
human spirit in all its forms (poetry, myth-making, etc.), was decried as
pernicious in many quarters. [The question as to how widely psychoanalysis
may be employed would at this time lead us too far, yet it will be
considered in Sect. 1, of the synthetic part of this volume.] Now it is
indeed true that it leads us toward all kinds of spiritual refuse. It does
so, however, in the service of truth, and it would be unfortunate to deny
to truth its right to justify itself. Any one determined to do so could in
that case defend a theory that sexual maladies are acquired by catching a
cold.

The spiritual refuse that psychoanalysis uncovers is like the manure on
which our cultivated fruits thrive. The dark titanic impulses are the raw
material from which in every man, the work of civilization forms an
ethical character. Where there is a strong light there are deep shadows.
Should we be so insincere as to deny, because of supposed danger, the
shadows in our inmost selves? Do we not diminish the light by so doing?
Morality, in whose name we are so scrupulous, demands above everything
else, truth and sincerity. But the beginning of all truth is that we do
not impose upon ourselves. “Know thyself” is written over the entrance of
the Pythian sanctuary. And it is this inspiring summons of the radiant god
of Delphi that psychoanalysis seeks to meet.

After this introductory notice, it will be possible properly to understand
the following instructive example, which contains exquisite sexual
symbolism.

Dream of Mr. T. “I dreamed I was riding on the railroad. Near me sat a
delicate, effeminate young man or boy; his presence caused erotic feelings
in me to a certain extent. (It appeared as if I put my arm about him.) The
train came to a standstill; we had arrived at a station and got out. I
went with the boy into a valley through which ran a small brook, on whose
bank were strawberries. We picked a great many. After I had gathered a
large number I returned to the railway and awoke.”

Supplementary communication. “I think I remember that an uncomfortable
feeling came over me in the boy’s company. The valley branched off to the
left from the railway.”

From a discussion of the dream it next appeared that T., who, as far as I
knew, entertained a pronounced aversion to homosexuality, had read a short
time before a detailed account of a notorious trial then going on in
Germany, that was concerned with real homosexual actions. [In
consciousness, of course. In the suppressed depths of unconsciousness the
infantile homosexual component also will surely be found.] An incident
from it, probably supported by some unconscious impulse, crowded its way
into the dream as an erotic wish, hence the affectionate scene in the
railway train. So far the matter would be intelligible even if in an
erotic day dream the image of a boy, considering the existing sexual
tendency of T., had been resolutely rejected by him. How are the other
processes in the dream related to it? Do they not at first sight appear
unconnected or meaningless?

And yet in them are manifested the fulfillment of the wish implied in the
erotic excitement in the company of the boy. The homosexual action of this
wish fulfillment would have been insufferable to the dream censor; it must
be intimated symbolically. And the remainder of the dream is accordingly
nothing but a dextrous veiling of a procedure hostile to the censor.

Even that the train comes to a standstill is a polite paraphrase.
[Paraphrase as the dreamer communicated to me, of an actual physical
condition—an erection.] Similar meaning is conveyed by the word station,
which reminds us of the Latin word status (from stare, to stand). The
scene in the car recalls moreover the joke in a story which often used to
occur to T. “A lady invited to a reception, where there were also young
girls, a _Hungarian_ [accentuated now, on account of what follows] (the
typical Vienna joker), who is feared on account of his racy wit. She
enjoined him at the same time, in view of the presence of the girls, not
to treat them to any of his spicy jests. The Hungarian agreed and appeared
at the party. To the amazement of the lady, he proposed the following
riddle: ‘’One can enter from in front, or from behind, only one has to
stand up.’ Observing the despair of the lady, he, with a sly, innocent
look, said, ‘But well then, what is it? Simply a trolley car.’ Next day
the daughter of the house appeared before her schoolmates in the high
school with the following:‘’Girls, I heard a great joke yesterday; one can
go in from in front or behind, only one must be stiff.’ ” [A neat
contribution, by the way, to the psychology of innocent girlhood.] The
anecdote was related to T. by a man later known to him as a homosexual. T.
had been with few Hungarians, but with these few, homosexuality had been,
as it happened, a favorite subject of conversation.

In the above we find many highly suggestive elements. The most suggestive
is, however, the strawberries. T. had, as appeared during the process of
the analysis, a couple of days before the dream read a French story where
the expression (new to him) _cueillir des fraises_ occurred. He went to a
Frenchman for the explanation of this phrase and learned that it was a
delicate way of speaking of the sexual act, because lovers like to go into
the woods under the pretext of picking strawberries, and thus separate
themselves from the rest of the company. In whatever way the dream wish
conceived its gratification, the valley (between the two hills!) through
which the brook flowed furnishes a quite definite suggestion. Here also
the above mentioned “from behind” probably gets a meaning.

The circumstance that the dream has, as it were, two faces, with one that
it openly exposes to view, implies that a distinction must be made between
the manifest and the latent material. The openly exposed face is the
manifest dream content (as the wording of the dream report represents the
dream); what is concealed is the latent dream thoughts. For the most part
a broad tissue of dream thoughts is condensed into a dream. A part of the
dream thoughts (not all) belongs regularly to the titanic elements of our
psyche. The shaping of the dream out of the dream thoughts is called by
Freud the dream work. Four principles direct it, Condensation,
Displacement, Representability, and Secondary Elaboration.

Condensation was just now mentioned. Many dream thoughts are condensed to
relatively few, but therefore all the more significant, images. Every
image (person, object, etc.) is wont to be “determined” by several dream
thoughts. Hence we speak of multiple determination or “Overdetermination.”

Displacement shows itself in the fact that the dream (evidently in the
service of distortion) pushes forward the unreal and pushes aside the
real; in short, rearranges the psychic values (interest) in such a way
that the dream in comparison with its latent thoughts appears as it were
displaced or “elsewhere centered.”

As the dream is a perceptual representation it must put into perceptually
comprehensible form everything that it wants to express, even that which
is most abstract. The tendency to vividly perceptual or plastic expression
that is characteristic of the dream, corresponds accordingly to the
Representability.

To the Secondary Elaboration we have to credit the last polishing of the
dream fabric. It looks after the logical connection in the pictorial
material, which is created by the displacing dream work. “This function
(i.e., the secondary elaboration) proceeds after the manner which the poet
maliciously ascribes to the philosopher; with its shreds and patches it
stops the gaps in the structure of the dream. The result of its effort is
that the dream loses its appearance of absurdity and disconnectedness and
approaches the standard of a comprehensible experience. But the effort is
not always crowned with complete success.” (Freud, “Traumdeutung,” p.
330.) The secondary elaboration can be compared also to the erection of a
façade.

Of the entire dreamwork Freud says (“Traumdeutung,” p. 338)
comprehensively that it is “not merely more careless, more incorrect, more
easily forgotten or more fragmentary than waking thought; it is something
qualitatively quite different and therefore not in the least comparable
with it. It does not, in fact, think, reckon, or judge, but limits itself
to remodeling. It may be exhaustively described if we keep in view the
conditions which its productions have to satisfy. These productions, the
dream, will have first of all to avoid the censor, and for this purpose
the dream work resorts to displacement of psychic intensities even to the
point of changing all psychic values; thoughts must be exclusively or
predominantly given in the material of visual and auditory memory images,
and from this grows that demand for representability which it answers with
new displacements. Greater intensities must apparently be attained here,
than are at its disposal in dream thoughts at night, and this purpose is
served by the extreme condensation which affects the elements of the dream
thoughts. There is little regard for the logical relations of the thought
material; they find finally an indirect representation in formal
peculiarities of dreams. The affects of dream thoughts suffer slighter
changes than their image content. They are usually repressed. Where they
are retained they are detached from images and grouped according to their
similarity.”

Briefly to express the nature of the dream, Stekel gives in one place
(“Sprache des Traumes,” p. 107) this concise characterization: “The dream
is a play of images in the service of the affects.”

A nearly exact formula for the dream has been contributed by Freud and
Rank, “On the foundation and with the help of repressed infantile sexual
material, the dream regularly represents as fulfilled actual wishes and
usually also erotic wishes in disguised and symbolically veiled form.”
(Jb.; ps. F., p. 519, and Trdtg., p. 117.) In this formula the wish
fulfillment, following Freud’s view, is preponderant, yet it would appear
to me that it is given too exclusive a rôle in the (chiefly affective)
background of the dream. An important point is the infantile in the dream,
in which connection we must mention the Regression.

Regression is a kind of psychic retrogression that takes place in manifold
ways in the dream (and related psychic events). The dream reaches back
towards infantile memories and wishes. [Sometimes this is already
recognizable in the manifest dream content. Usually, however, it is first
disclosed by psychoanalysis. Strongly repressed, and therefore difficult
of access, is this infantile sexual material. On the infantile forms of
sexuality, see Freud, “Three Contributions to Sexual Theory.”] It reaches
back also from the complicated and completed to a more primitive function,
from abstract thought to perceptual images, from practical activity to
hallucinatory wish fulfillment. [The latter with especial significance in
the convenience dreams. We fall asleep, for instance, when thirsty, then
instead of reaching for the glass of water, we dream of the drink.] The
dreamer thus approaches his own childhood, as he does likewise the
childhood of the human race, by reaching back for the more primitive
perceptual mode of thought. [On the second kind of regression the Zurich
psychiatrist, C. G. Jung, has made extraordinary interesting revelations.
His writings will further occupy our attention later.]

Nietzsche writes (“Menschliches, Allzumenschliches”), “In sleep and in
dreams we pass through the entire curriculum of primitive mankind.... I
mean as even to-day we think in dreams, mankind thought in waking life
through many thousand years; the first cause that struck his spirit in
order to explain anything that needed explanation satisfied him and passed
as truth. In dreams this piece of ancient humanity works on in us, for it
is the germ from which the higher reason developed and in every man still
develops. The dream takes us back into remote conditions of human culture
and puts in our hand the means of understanding it better. The dream
thought is now so easy because, during the enormous duration of the
evolution of mankind we have been so well trained in just this form of
cheap, phantastic explanation by the first agreeable fancy. In that
respect the dream is a means of recovery for the brain, which by day has
to satisfy the strenuous demands of thought required by the higher
culture.” (Works, Vol. II, pp. 27 ff.)

If we remember that the explanation of nature and the philosophizing of
unschooled humanity is consummated in the form of myths, we can deduce
from the preceding an analogy between myth making and dreaming. This
analogy is much further developed by psychoanalysis. Freud blazes a path
with the following words: “The research into these concepts of folk
psychology [myths, sagas, fairy stories] is at present not by any means
concluded, but it is apparent everywhere from myths, for instance, that
they correspond to the displaced residues of wish phantasies of entire
nations, the dreams of ages of young humanity.” (Samml. kl. Lehr. II, p.
205.) It will be shown later that fairy stories and myths can actually be
subjected to the same psychologic interpretation as dreams, that for the
most part they rest on the same psychological motives (suppressed wishes,
that are common to all men) and that they show a similar structure to that
of dreams.

Abraham (Traum und Mythus)(1) has gone farther in developing the
parallelism of dream and myth. For him the myth is the dream of a people
and a dream is the myth of the individual. He says, e.g., “The dream is
(according to Freud) a piece of superseded infantile, mental life” and
“the myth is a piece of superseded infantile, mental life of a people”;
also, “The dream then, is the myth of the individual.” Rank conceives the
myths as images intermediate between collective dreams and collective
poems. “For as in the individual the dream or poem is destined to draw off
unconscious emotions that are repressed in the course of the evolution of
civilization, so in mythical or religious phantasies a whole people
liberates itself for the maintenance of its psychic soundness from those
primal impulses that are refractory to culture (titanic), while at the
same time it creates, as it were, a collective symptom for taking up all
repressed emotion.” (Inz-Mot., p. 277. Cf. also Kunstl., p. 36.)

A definite group of such repressed primal impulses is given a prominent
place by psychoanalysis. I refer to the so-called Œdipus complex that
plays an important rôle in the dream life as also in myth and apparently,
also in creative poetry. The fables (sagas, dramas) of Œdipus, who slays
his father and marries his mother are well known. According to the
observations of psychoanalysis there is a bit of Œdipus in every one of
us. [These Œdipus elements in us can—as I must observe after reading
Imago, January, 1913—be called “titanic” in the narrower sense, following
the lead of Lorenz. They contain the motive for the separation of the
child from the parents.] The related conflicts, that in their entirety
constitute the Œdipus complex (almost always unconscious, because actively
repressed) arise in the disturbance of the relation to the parents which
every child goes through more or less in its first (and very early) sexual
emotions. “If king Œdipus can deeply affect modern mankind no less than
the contemporary Greeks, the explanation can lie only in the fact that the
effect of the Greek tragedy does not depend on the antithesis between fate
and the human will, but in the peculiarity of the material in which this
antithesis is developed. There must be a voice in our inner life which is
ready to recognize the compelling power of fate in the case of Œdipus,
while we reject as arbitrary the situations in the Ahnfrau or other
destiny tragedies. And such an element is indeed contained in the history
of king Œdipus. His fate touches us only because it might have been ours,
because the oracle hung the same curse over us before our birth as over
him. For us all, probably, it is ordained that we should direct our first
sexual feelings towards our mothers, the first hate and wish for violence
against our fathers. Our dreams convince us of that. King Œdipus, who has
slain his father Laius and married his mother Jocasta, is only the
wish-fulfillment of our childhood. But more fortunate than he, we have
been able, unless we have become psychoneurotic, to dissociate our sexual
feelings from our mothers and forget our jealousy of our fathers. From the
person in whom that childish wish has been fulfilled we recoil with the
entire force of the repressions, that these wishes have since that time
suffered in our inner soul. While the poet in his probing brings to light
the guilt of Œdipus, he calls to our attention our own inner life, in
which that impulse, though repressed, is always present. The antithesis
with which the chorus leaves us


                      See, that is Œdipus,
    Who solved the great riddle and was peerless in power,
    Whose fortune the townspeople all extolled and envied.
    See into what a terrible flood of mishap he has sunk.


This admonition hits us and our pride, we who have become in our own
estimation, since the years of childhood, so wise and so mighty. Like
Œdipus, we live in ignorance of the wishes that are so offensive to
morality, which nature has forced upon us, and after their disclosure we
should all like to turn away our gaze from the scenes of our childhood.”
(Freud, Trdtg., p. 190 f.)

Believing that I have by this time sufficiently prepared the reader who
was unfamiliar with psychoanalysis for the psychoanalytic part of my
investigation, I will dispense with further time-consuming explanations.


