
## [HOME](scrolls/home)

# II-V
  Section V.


The Problem Of Multiple Interpretation.


After what has been said it is clear that the Parable contains instruction
in the sense of the higher alchemy. Whoever has attentively read this 4th
chapter will certainly be in a position to understand the parable, in
large part, in a hermetic sense. I do not wish to develop this
interpretation now, for to a certain extent it develops itself without
further effort, and what goes beyond that can be treated only in the
second part of this volume. I shall limit myself now to a few suggestions.

In regard to the external setting of the parable as a piece of rosicrucian
literature, we must remember that it was published in 1788, the time of
the later gold- and rose-cross societies, and in a book whose theosophic
and religious character is seen in all the figures contained in it as well
as in the greater part of the text. It is continually reiterated that gold
is not common gold but our gold, that the stone is a spiritual stone
(Jesus Christ), etc. The creation of the world, the religious duty of
mankind, the mystic path to the experiencing of divinity—all is
represented in detailed pictures with predominantly chemical symbolism.
This higher conception of alchemy, that corresponds throughout to the
ideal of the so-called old or true rosicrucian, does not prevent the
editor from believing in the possibility of miraculous gifts which are to
be gained through the hermetic art. Many parts of the book make us suspect
a certain naïveté that may go several degrees beyond the simplicity
required for religious development.

As for the origin of the parable there are two possibilities. Either the
editor is himself the author and as such retires into the background,
while he acts as collector of old rosicrucian manuscripts, that he now in
publishing, discloses to amateurs in the art, or the editor is merely
editor. In either case the obligation remains to interpret the parable
hermetically. The educational purpose of the editor is established. If he
is himself the author, he himself has clothed his teachings in the images
of the parable. If, on the contrary, the author is some one else (either a
contemporary and so [Symbol: sun] R. C. [Symbol: cross], or an old
hermetic philosopher, Fr. R. C.), the editor has found in the piece edited
by him a subject suitable to his purpose, a material that voices his
doctrines. We can evidently also rest satisfied, in order to evade the
question of authorship, that the writing itself gets its own character
from the hermetic interpretations, and shows in detail its correspondingly
theosophic material. Nevertheless I desire to show the directing hand of
the collector and editor.

Several controlling elements pointing toward a hermetic theosophic
interpretation, which the reader probably looks for in the parable, may be
shown if I mention the ethical purposes that here and there emerge in our
psychoanalytic interpretation of the parable. I might remind the reader
that the wanderer is a killer of dragons like St. George; the holy Mary is
represented standing over a dragon; also under the Buddha enthroned upon a
lotus flower, there curls not infrequently a vanquished dragon; etc. I
might mention the religious symbolism of the narrow path that leads to the
true life. Many occurrences in the parable are to be conceived as trials,
and we can see the wanderer overcome the elemental world (Nature triumphs
over Nature), wherein he is proved by all four elements and comes off
victorious from all tests. The fight with the lion in the den can be
regarded as a world test, the walk on the cloud capped wall (like the
flying up in the vessel) as an air test, the mill episode (and the flood
in the vessel) as a water ordeal, and the stay in the heated vessel as a
fire ordeal. The old miller is God, the ten mill wheels are the ten
commandments, and likewise the ten Sephiroth that create the whole world.
We are also reminded of the Ophanim (wheels, a class of angels).

Several particulars suggest the admission of the seeker into a hermetic
fraternity, which, as far as I am concerned, might be called rosicrucian.
There was also among the cabbalists, as apparently is shown by Reuchlin
(De Vero Mirifico), an initiation into a mystery. Fludd (in his Tractatus
theologo-philosophicus de vita, morte et resurrectione, Chap. XVI)
apostrophizes the rosicrucians: “With open eyes I saw from your brief
answer to two men whom you intended, at the exhortation of the Holy Ghost,
to choose to your cloister or house, that you possessed the same knowledge
of the true mystery and the same keys of knowledge that unlock the
Paradise of Joy, as the patriarchs and prophets of holy scripture
possess.” And in another place, “Believe that your (the R. C. [Symbol:
cross]) palace or abode is situated at the confines of the earthly
paradise [locus voluptatis terrestris]....” In our parable it is a
paradise of joy [pratum felicitatis] where the wanderer meets the company
into which he desires admission. He must undergo examinations like every
neophyte. The collegium sapientiae of the parable refers to the
rosicrucian Collegium Sancti Spiritus, which is actually named in another
passage of the book that contains the parable.

The blood of the lion, which the wanderer gets by cutting him up, refers
to the rose-colored blood of the cross that we gain through deep digging
and hammering. The wanderer picks roses and puts them in his hat, a mark
of honor. The master is generally seen provided with a hat in the old
pictures. “Rose garden” (the garden of the parable is quadrangular) was a
name applied apparently to alchemistic lodges. The philosophical work
itself is compared to the rose; the white rose is the white tincture, the
red rose is the red tincture (different degrees of completion that follow
the degrees of black). They are plucked in the “alchemistic paradise,” but
one must set about it in obedience to nature. Basilius Valentinus in the
third of his twelve keys writes of the great magisterium: “So whoever
wishes to compare our incombustible sulphur of all the wise men, must
first take heed for himself, that he look for our sulphur in one who is
inwardly incombustible; which cannot occur unless the salt sea has
swallowed the corpse and completely cast it up again. Then raise it in its
degree, so that it surpass in brilliance all the stars of heaven, and
become in its nature as rich in blood, as the pelican when he wounds
himself in his breast, so that his young may be well nourished without
malady to his body, and can eat of his blood. [The pelican possesses under
its bill a great pouch in which he can preserve food, principally fish. If
he regurgitates the food out of his crop to feed his young he rests his
bill against his breast. That gave rise to the belief that it tore open
its breast in order to feed its young with its blood. From early times the
pelican is therefore used as a symbol of Christ, who shed his blood for
mankind. The alchemists represented the philosopher’s stone, the red
tincture, as a pelican; for by its projection on the baser metals it
sacrificed itself and, as it were, gave its blood to tincture them. The
Christian and the hermetic symbolism are concurrent as in higher sense the
stone Christ, i.e., the Messiah, is on our hearts.] That is the rose of
our master with color of scarlet and red dragon’s blood, written of by
many, also the purple mantle of the highest commanders in our art, with
which the Queen of Salvation is clothed, and by which all the poor metals
can be warmed. Keep well this mantle of honor.”

It is interesting that dream parallels can support us in both directions
on the path of hermetic interpretation. I have in the second section of
this volume reported the “dream of the Flying Post.” I must now complete
its interpretation. Stekel writes (l. c, p. 399): “If we examine the birth
and uterus phantasies, Mr. X. Z., the dreamer, turns out to be a base
criminal. He struggles with conscious murder ideas. He is afraid he may
kill his uncle or his mother. He is very pious. But his soul is black as
the coal-dust-strewn street. His evil thoughts (the homosexual) pursue
him. He enters the mill. It is God’s mill that grinds slowly but surely.
His weight (his burden of sin) drives the mill. He is expelled. He enters
the Flying Post. It is the post that unites heaven and earth. He is to
pay, i.e., do penance for his sins. His sins are erotic (three heller =
the genitals). His sins and misdeeds stink before heaven (dirty feet). The
conductor is death.... The wheel room refers to the wheel of criminals.
The water is blood.” The perilous situation in the dream, God’s mill, the
blackness, the water or blood, which are their analogues, are found in the
parable without further reference being necessary. Especially would I
select the unusual detail of the stinking, dirty feet, for which probably
no one would see any association in the parable. It is found in the
episode of the rotting of the bridal pair in the receptacle. It is
expressly stated that the putrefying corpses (i.e., the disintegrating
sinful bodies of men in the theosophic work) stink. The opposite is the
odor of sanctity. Actually this opposition recurs frequently in hermetic
manuals. The conductor in the dream is described hermetically as a
messenger of heaven [Symbol: mercury], Hermes, conveyor of souls. His
first appearance in the life of man is conscience. This causes our sins,
which would be otherwise indifferent, to stink. In alchemy the substances
stink on their dissolution in mercurious purifying liquid. Only later does
the agreeable fragrance appear.

If we find on the one hand that the parable appears as a hermetic writing,
which allows us to develop theosophical principles from its chemical
analogues, on the other hand the psychoanalytic interpretation is not
thereby shaken. Consequently the question arises for us how it is possible
to give several interpretations of a long series of symbols that stand in
complete opposition. [If we were concerned with individual symbols merely,
the matter would not be at all extraordinary.] Our research has shown that
they are possible. The psychoanalytic interpretation brings to view
elements of a purposeless and irrational life of impulse, which works out
its fury in the phantasies of the parable; and now the analysis of
hermetic writings shows us that the parable, like all deep alchemistic
books, is an introduction to a mystic religious life,—according to the
degree of clearness with which the ideas hovered before the author. For
just as the psychoanalytically derived meaning of the phantasies does not
occur to him, so possibly even the mystical way on which he must travel
must have appeared only hazily before him. So no matter what degree of
clearness the subjective experience may have had from the author’s point
of view, we have for the solution of our own problem, to stick to the
given object and to the possibilities of interpretation that are so
extraordinarily coherent.

The interpretations are really three; the psychoanalytic, which leads us
to the depths of the impulsive life; then the vividly contrasting hermetic
religious one, which, as it were, leads us up to high ideals and which I
shall call shortly the anagogic; and third, the chemical (natural
philosophical), which, so to speak, lies midway and, in contrast to the
two others, appears ethically indifferent. The third meaning of this work
of imagination lies in different relations half way between the
psychoanalytic and the anagogic, and can, as alchemistic literature shows,
be conceived as the bearer of the anagogic.

The parable may serve as an academic illustration for the entire hermetic
(philosophy). The problem of multiple interpretation is quite universal,
in the sense namely that one encounters it everywhere where the
imagination is creatively active. So our study opens wide fields and art
and mythology especially appear to invite us. I will depart as little as
possible, however, from the province chosen as an example, i.e., alchemy.
But in two fables I shall work out the problem of multiple interpretation.
In the choice of the fables I am influenced by the fact that a
psychoanalytic elaboration (Rank’s) lies ready to hand, and that both are
subjected to an anagogic interpretation by Hitchcock, who wrote the book
on alchemy. This enables me to take the matter up briefly because I can
simply refer to the detailed treatment in the above mentioned books. The
two stories belong to Grimm’s collection and are called the Six Swans, and
the Three Feathers. (K. H. M., Nos. 49 and 63.)

Rank (Lohenginsage) connects the story of the six swans and numerous
similar stories with the knight of the swan saga. It is shown that the
mythical contents of all these narratives have at bottom those elemental
forces of the impulse life that we have found in the parable, and that
they are specially founded on family conflicts, i.e., on those
uncontrolled love and hate motives that come out in their crassest form in
the neurotic as his (phantasied) “family romance.” To this family romance
belongs, among others, incest in different forms, the illicit love for the
mother, the rescuing of the mother from peril, the rescuing of the father,
the wish to be the father, etc., phantasies whose meaning is explained in
the writings of Freud and Rank (Myth of the Birth of the Hero(3)).
According to Hitchcock, on the contrary, the same story tells of a man who
in the decline of life falls into error, takes the sin to his heart, but
then, counseled by his conscience, seeks his better self and completes the
(alchemic-creative) work of the six days. (Hitchcock, Red Book.)

It is incontestable that there is, besides the psychoanalytic and anagogic
interpretation of this tale (and almost all others), a nature mythological
and in the special sense, an astronomical interpretation. Significant
indications of this are the seven children and the seven years, the sewing
of clothes made of star flowers, the lack of an arm as in the case of
Marduk, and the corresponding heroes of astral myths, and many others. One
of the seven is particularly distinguished like the sun among the
so-called planets. The ethically indifferent meaning of the tale alongside
of the psychoanalytic and the anagogic corresponds to the chemical
contents of the hermetic writings. As object of the indifferent meaning
there always stands the natural science content of the spirit’s creation.
There is generally a certain relationship between the astronomical and the
alchemistic meanings. It is now well known that alchemy was influenced by
astrology, that the seven metals correspond to the seven planets, that, as
the sun is distinguished among the planets, so is gold among the metals;
and as in astrology combustion takes place in heaven, so it occurs also in
the alembic of the alchemists. And the fact that the sun maiden at the end
of the story releases her six planet brothers, sounds exactly as when the
tincturing power of gold at the end of six days perfects the six imperfect
metals and makes the ill, well.

In the second story I will emphasize to a somewhat greater degree the
opposition of the two contrasting interpretations (psychoanalytic and
anagogic), as I must return to it again. The story is suited to a detailed
treatment on account of its brevity. I will first present it.

There was once a king who had three sons, two of whom were clever and
shrewd, but the third did not talk much, was simple and was merely called
the Simpleton. When the king grew old and feeble and expected his end, he
did not know which one of his sons should inherit the kingdom after him.
So he said to them, “Go forth, and whoever brings me the finest carpet
shall be king after my death.” And lest there be any disagreement among
them, he led them before his castle, blew three feathers into the air, and
said: “As they fly, so shall you go.” One flew towards the east, the other
towards the west, the third, however, flew straight ahead, but flying only
a short distance soon fell to earth. Now one brother went to the right,
the other went to the left, and they laughed at Simpleton, who had to stay
with the third feather where it had fallen.

Simpleton sat down and was sad. Suddenly he noticed that near the feather
lay a trap door. He raised it, found a stairway, and went down. Then he
came before another door, knocked and listened, while inside a voice
called:


    “Maiden green and small,
    Shrunken old crone,
    Old crone’s little dog,
    Crone here and there,
    Let us see quickly who is out there.”


The door opened and he saw a big fat toad and round about her a crowd of
little toads. The fat toad asked what his wish was. He answered, “I should
have liked the most beautiful and finest carpet.” Then she called a young
one and said:


    “Maiden green and small,
    Shrunken old crone,
    Crone’s little dog,
    Crone here and there,
    Fetch here the big box.”


The young toad brought the box and the fat toad opened it and gave
Simpleton a carpet from it, so beautiful and so fine as up above on the
earth could not have been woven. Then he thanked her and climbed up again.

The two others had, however, considered their youngest brother so
weak-minded that they believed that he would not find and bring anything
back. “Why should we take so much trouble,” said they, and took from the
back of the first shepherd’s wife that met them her coarse shawl and
carried it home to the king. At the same time Simpleton returned and
brought his beautiful carpet, and when the king saw it he was astonished
and said: “If justice must be done, the kingdom belongs to the youngest.”

But the two others gave their father no peace, and said that it was
impossible that Simpleton, who lacked understanding in all things, could
be a king, and begged him to make a new condition. Then the father said,
“The one that brings me the most beautiful ring shall be king,” led the
three brothers out and blew three feathers into the air for them to
follow. The two oldest again went east and west, and Simpleton’s feather
flew straight ahead and fell down near the door in the earth. So he went
down again to the fat toad and told her that he needed the most beautiful
ring. She immediately had her big box fetched and from it gave him a ring
that glittered with jewels and was more beautiful than any goldsmith upon
the earth could have made. The two eldest laughed about Simpleton, who was
going to look for a gold ring, but they took no trouble, and knocked the
pin out of an old wagon ring and brought the ring to the king. But when
Simpleton showed his gold ring the father again said, “The kingdom belongs
to him.” The two eldest did not cease importuning the king till he made a
third condition and declared that the kingdom should go to the one that
brought home the fairest woman. Again he blew the three feathers into the
air and they flew as before.

So Simpleton without more ado went down to the fat toad and said, “I have
to take home the fairest woman.” “The fairest woman, hey? She is not right
here, but none the less you shall have her.” She gave him a hollowed out
carrot to which were harnessed six little mice. Then Simpleton sadly said,
“What shall I do with it?” The toad replied, “Just put one of my little
toads in it.” So he took one by chance from the circle and put it in the
yellow carriage, but hardly had she taken her seat when she became a
surpassingly beautiful maiden, the carrot a coach, and the six little
mice, horses. So he kissed the maiden, drove away with the horses and took
them to the king. His brothers came afterwards. They had not taken any
trouble to find a fair lady but had brought the first good looking peasant
woman. As the king looked at them he said, “The youngest gets the kingdom
after my death.” But the two oldest deafened the king’s ears with their
outcry: “We cannot allow the Simpleton to be king,” and gained his consent
that the one whose woman should jump through a ring that hung in the
middle of the room should have the preference. They thought, “The peasant
women can do it easily, they are strong enough, but the delicate miss will
jump herself to death.” The old king consented to this also. So the two
peasant women jumped, even jumped through the ring, but were so clumsy
that they fell and broke their awkward arms and legs. Then the beautiful
woman whom Simpleton had brought leaped through as easily as a roe, and
all opposition had to cease. So he received the crown and ruled long and
wisely.

I offer first a neat psychoanalytic interpretation of this narrative. Like
the dream, the fairy tale is regularly a phantastic fulfillment of wishes,
and, of such indeed, as we realize, but which life does not satisfy, as
well as of such as we are hardly aware of in consciousness, and would not
entertain if we knew them clearly. Reality denies much, especially to the
weak, or to those who feel themselves weak, or who have a smaller capacity
for work in the struggle for existence in relation to their fellow men.
The efficient person accomplishes in his life what he wishes, the wishes
of the weak remain unfulfilled, and for this reason the weak, or whoever
in comparison with the magnitude of his desires, thinks himself weak,
avails himself of the phantastic wish fulfillment. He desires to attain
the unattainable at least in imagination. This is the psychological reason
why so many fairy stories are composed from the standpoint of the weak, so
that the experiencing Ego of the fairy tale, the hero, is a simpleton, the
smallest or the weakest or the youngest one who is oppressed, etc. The
hero of the foregoing tale is a simpleton and the youngest. In his
phantasy, that is, in the story, he stamps his brothers, who are in real
life more efficient, and whom he envies, as malicious, disagreeable
characters. (In real life we can generally observe how suspicious are, for
instance, physically deformed people. Their sensitiveness is well known.)
Like the fox to whom the grapes are sour, he declares that what his
stronger fellows accomplish is bad, their performance of their duty
defective, and their aims contemptible, especially in the sexual sphere,
where he feels himself openly most injured. The tale treats specifically
from the outset the conquest of a woman. The carpet, the ring, are female
symbols, the first is the body of the woman, the ring is the vagina (Greek
kteis = comb = pudenda muliebria). (The carpet is still more specifically
marked as a female symbol in that the brothers take it from the body of a
shepherdess. Shepherdess—a coarse “rag”—coarse “cloth”—in contrast to the
fine carpet of the hero.)

The simpleton is one who does not like much work. When he also ascribes
negligence to his brothers he betrays to us his own nature, in that his
“feather,” i.e., himself, does not go far, while his brothers’ feathers go
some distance. In order to invalidate this view of himself the
distribution of the feathers is put off on chance, as if to a higher
determining power. This has always been a favorite excuse with lazy and
inefficient people.

One of the means of consoling himself for the unattainableness of his
wishes is the belief in miracles. (Cf. my work on Phantasy and Mythos.)
The simpleton gains his advantage in a miraculous manner; roasted pigeons
fly into his mouth.

In his erotic enterprises he sticks to his own immediate neighborhood. He
clearly bears within himself an Imago that holds him fast. [This is an
image, withdrawn from consciousness and consequently indestructible, of
the object of one’s earliest passion, which continues to operate as a
strongly affective complex, and takes hold upon life with a formative
effect. The most powerful Imagos are those of the parents. Here naturally
the mother imago comes to view, which later takes a position in the center
of the love life (namely the choice of object).] Whither does he turn for
his journey of conquest? Into the earth. The earth is the mother as a
familiar symbol language teaches us. Trap door, box, subterranean holes,
suggest a womb phantasy. The toad frequently appears with the significance
of the uterus, harmonizing with the situation that the tale presents. (On
the contrary frog is usually penis.) The toad’s big box (= mother) is also
the womb. From it indeed the female symbols, in this connection, sisters,
are produced for the simpleton. The box is, however, also the domestic
cupboard,—food closet, parcel, bandbox, chamber, bowl, etc.,—from which
the good mother hands out tasty gifts, toys, etc. Just as the father in
childish phantasy can do anything, so the mother has a box out of which
she takes all kinds of good gifts for the children. Down among the toads
an ideal family episode is enacted. The mother’s inexhaustible box (with
the double meaning) even delivers the desired woman for the simpleton.

The woman—for whom? Doubtless for the simpleton, psychologically. The tale
says for the king, because the female symbols, carpet, ring, the king
desires for himself, in so many words, and the inference is that the woman
also belongs to him. The conclusion of the tale, however, turns out true
to the psychological situation, as it does away with the king and lets the
simpleton live on, apparently with the same woman. It is clear as day that
the simpleton identifies himself with his father, places himself in his
place. The image, which possesses him from the first is the father’s
woman, the mother. And the father’s death—that is considerately
ignored—which brings queen and crown, is a wish of the simpleton. So again
we find ourselves at the center of the Œdipus complex. As
mother-substitute figures the sister, one of the little toads.

We have regarded the story first from the point of view of the
inefficiency of the hero, and have thereupon stumbled upon erotic
relations, finally upon the Œdipus complex. The psychological connection
results from the fact that those images on which the Œdipus complex is
constructed appear calculated to produce an inefficiency in the erotic
life.

The anagogic interpretation of Hitchcock (l. c., pp. 175 ff.) is as
follows, though somewhat abridged:

The king plainly means man. He has three sons; he is an image of the
Trinity, which in the sense of our presentation we shall think of as body,
soul and spirit. Two of the sons were wise in the worldly sense, but the
third, who represents spirit and in the primitive form, is called
conscience, is simple in order to typify the straight and narrow path of
truth. The spirit leads in sacred silence those who meekly follow it and
dies in a mystical sense if it is denied, or else appears in other forms
in order to pursue the soul with the ghosts of murdered virtues. Man is,
as it were, in doubt concerning the principle to which the highest
leadership in life is due. “Go forth and whoever brings me the finest
carpet shall be king after my death.” The carpet is something on which one
walks or stands, here representing the best way of life according to
Isaiah XXX, 21. “This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right
hand and when ye turn to the left.”

The three feathers are, of course, the three principles. Two of them move
at once in opposite directions [towards the east and towards the west, as
many writers on alchemy represent the two principles or breaths, anima and
corpus or [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver]] and so come even at the
outset away from the right path. The third, symbol of the spirit, flies
straight forward and has not far to its end, for simple is the way to the
inner life. And so the spirit will speak to us if we follow its voice, at
first quite a faint voice: “But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
mouth and in thy heart that thou mayst do it.” (Deuteronomy XXX, 14.) Yet
the soul is not free from sadness, as the man stands still on the lower
steps of the ladder that leads up into eternal life. Simpleton is troubled
in his heart and in the humility of this affliction he discovers “all at
once” a secret door, which shows him the entrance into the mystical life.
The door is on the surface of the earth, in abasement, as the third
feather determined it in advance. As Simpleton discreetly obeyed it, he
strolled along the path that the door opened for him. Three steps, three
fundamental forces. So Christ had to descend before he could rise. The
hero of the story knocks as Christ knocks in the gospel (i.e., on the
inner door, contrasted with the law of Moses, the outer door). The big
toad with her little ones in a circle about her signifies the great mother
nature and her creatures, which surround her in a circle; in a circle, for
nature always returns upon herself in a cycle. Simpleton gets the most
beautiful carpet.

The other two beings that we call understanding and feelings (sun and moon
of the hermetic writings) look without, instead of seeking the way within;
so it comes to pass that they take the first best coarse cloths.

To bring the most beautiful ring is to bring truth, which like a ring has
neither beginning nor end. Understanding and feeling go in different
directions, the simpleton waits meekly by the door that leads to the
interior of the great mother. [The appearance of this conception in the
anagogic interpretation is also important.]

In the third test, the search for “the fairest woman,” the crown of life,
conceived exoterically as well as esoterically, the carrot represents the
vegetative life (body, the natural man), and the six mice that draw it are
our old friends the six swans or virtues, and the highest of these
compassion—or love—goes as the enthroned queen in the carriage. The
uninitiated man is almost in doubt and asks, “What shall I do with a
carrot?” Yet the great mother replies, as it were, “Take one of my
fundamental forces.” And what do we see then? The toad becomes a beautiful
maiden, etc. The man now all at once realizes how fearfully and
wonderfully he is made. Filled with reverence of himself he is ready to
cry, “Not my will but thine be done.”

Still another test remains. We must all go through a sort of mystical
ring, which hangs in the hall (of learning). Only one in the whole
universe is in a condition to accomplish it, to endure it without injury.
The beautiful delicate maid with the miraculous gift is the spirit
[spiritus or [Symbol: Mercury] of alchemy].

We shall add that the two interpretations externally contradict each
other, although each exhibits a faultless finality. I should note that I
have limited myself to the briefest exposition; in a further working out
of the analysis the two expositions can be much more closely identified
with the motives of the story.

First, then, the question arises, how one and the same series of images
can harmonize several mutually exclusive interpretations (problem of
multiple interpretation); yet we have discovered in the parable three
practically equivalent schemes of interpretation, the psychoanalytic, the
chemical (scientific), and the anagogic. Secondly, the question presents
itself more particularly how can two so antithetic meanings as the
psychoanalytic and the anagogic exist side by side.





 
