
## [HOME](scrolls/home)

# III-I-C
 
C. Regeneration.


In the favorable issue of introversion, i.e., when we conquer the dragon,
we liberate a valuable treasure, namely, an enormous psychic energy, or,
according to the psychoanalytic view, libido, which is applicable to the
much desired new creation (as the titanic aspect of which we recognize the
“reforming”). The symbolic type, either openly or hiddenly expressed, of
the setting free of an active libido, is birth. A libido symbol with the
characteristic of active life comes out of a mother symbol. (The former is
either explicitly a child or even a food, or it is phallic or animal. Zbl.
Psa., III, p. 115.) As the mystic is author of this, his birth, he has
become his own father.

Introversion (seeking for the uterus or the grave) is a necessary
presupposition of regeneration or resurrection, and this is a necessary
presupposition of the mystical creation of the new man. (John III, 1-6):
“There was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
The same came to Jesus by night [introversion] and said unto him, ‘Rabbi,
we know that thou art a teacher come from God; for no man can do these
miracles that thou doest except God be with him.’ Jesus answered and said
unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be
born when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mother’s womb
and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man
be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, that which is born of the
Spirit is spirit.”

Water is one of the most general religious mother symbols (baptism). With
the earliest alchemists the brazen man becomes silver, the silver man,
gold, by being dipped in the holy fountain.

A mythological representation of introversion with its danger and with
regeneration was given previously [see Vishnu’s adventure]. Detailed
examples follow; first the Celtic myth of the birth of Taliesin.

In olden times there was a man of noble parentage in Peelyn named Tegid
Voel. His ancestral country was in the center of the lake of Tegid. His
wife was called Ceridwen. Of her he had a son, Morvram ap Tegid, and a
daughter, Creirwy, the fairest maiden in the world. These two had another
brother, the ugliest of all beings, named Avagddu. Ceridwen, the mother of
this ill favored son, well knew that he would have little success in
society, although he was endowed with many fine qualities. She determined
to prepare a kettle [introversion] for her son, so that on account of his
skill in looking into the future [Siddhi] he should find entrance into
society. The kettle of water began to boil [cooking of the child in the
uterus vessel] and the cooking had to be continued without interruption
till one could get three blessed drops from the gifts of the Spirit
[treasure]. She set Gwyon, the son of Gwreang of Llanveir, to watch the
preparation of the kettle, and appointed a blind man [mutilation or
castration] named Morda to keep alight the fire under the kettle, with the
command that he should not permit the interruption of the boiling for a
year and a day. [Cf. the activity of the wanderer in the parable, Sec. 14
ff.] Meanwhile Ceridwen occupied herself with the stars, watched daily the
movement of the planets, and gathered herbs of all varieties that
possessed peculiar powers [Siddhis]. Towards the end of the year, while
she was still looking for herbs, it happened that three drops of the
powerful water flew out of the kettle and fell on Gwyon’s finger. They
scalded him and he stuck his finger in his mouth. As the precious drops
touched his lips all the events of the future were opened to his eyes, and
he saw that he must be on his guard against Ceridwen [dreaded mother]. He
rushed home. The kettle split into two parts [motive of the tearing apart
of the uterus], for all the water in it except the three powerful drops
were poisonous [danger of introversion], so that it poisoned the chargers
of Gwyddno Garantur, which were drinking out of the gutter into which the
kettle had emptied itself [the flood]. Now Ceridwen came in and saw that
her whole year’s work was lost. She took a pestle and struck the blind man
so hard on the head that one of his eyes fell out on his cheeks. “You have
unjustly deformed me,” cried Morda; “you see that I am guiltless. Your
loss is not caused by my blunder.” “Verily,” said Ceridwen, “Gwyon the
Small it was that robbed me.” Immediately she pursued him, but Gwyon saw
her from a distance and turned into a hare and redoubled his speed, but
she at once became a hound, forced him to turn around and chased him
towards a river. He jumped in and became a fish, but his enemy pursued him
quickly in the shape of an otter, so that he had to assume the form of a
bird and fly up into the air. But the element gave him no place of refuge,
for the woman became a falcon, came after him and would have caught him
[forms of anxiety]. Trembling for fear of death, he saw a heap of smooth
wheat on a threshing floor, fell into the middle of it and turned into a
grain of wheat. But Ceridwen took the shape of a black hen, flew to the
wheat, scratched it asunder, recognized the grain and swallowed it
[impregnation, incest]. She became pregnant from it and after being
confined for nine months [regeneration] she found so lovely a child
[improvement] that she could no longer think of its death [immortality].
She put it in a boat, covered it with a skin [skin = lanugo of the fœtus,
belongs to the birth motive], and at the instigation of her husband cast
the skiff into the sea on the 29th of April. At this time the fish weir of
Gwyddno stood between Dyvi and Aberystwyth, near his own stronghold. It
was usual in this weir every year on the 1st of May to catch fish worth
100 pounds. Gwyddno had an only son, Elphin. He was very unfortunate in
his undertakings, and so his father thought him born in an evil hour. His
counselors persuaded the father, however, to let his son draw the weir
basket this time, to try whether good luck would ever be his, and so that
he might yet gain something with which to go forth into the world. On the
next day, the 1st of May, Elphin examined the weir basket and found
nothing, yet as he went away, he saw the boat covered with the skin rest
on the post of the weir. One of the fishermen said to him, “You have never
been so unlucky as you were to-night, but now you have destroyed the
virtue of the weir basket,” in which they always found a hundred pounds’
worth on the first of May. “How so?” asked Elphin. “The boat may easily
contain the worth of the hundred.” The skin was lifted and he that opened
it saw the forehead of a child and said to Elphin, “See the beaming
forehead.” “Beaming forehead, Taliesin, be his name,” replied the prince,
who took the child in his arms and because of his own misfortune, pitied
it. He put it behind him on his charger. Immediately the child composed a
song for the consolation and praise of Elphin, and at the same time
prophesied to him his future fame. Elphin took the child into the
stronghold and showed him to his father, who asked the child whether he
was a human being or a spirit. Whereupon he answered in the following
song: “I am Elphin’s first bard; my native country is the land of the
cherubim. The heavenly John called me Merddin [Merlin] and finally, every
one, King: Taliesin. I was nine months in the womb of my mother Ceridwen,
before which I was the little Gwyon, now I am Taliesin. With my Lord I was
in the world above, and fell as Lucifer into the depths of hell. I carried
the banner before Alexander. I know the names of the stars from north to
south. I was in the circle of Gwdion [Gwydi on] in the Tetragrammaton. I
accompanied the Hean into the valley of Hebron. I was in Canaan when
Abraham was killed. I was in the court of Dve before Gwdion was born, a
companion of Eli and Enoch. I was at the judgment that condemned the Son
of God to the cross. I was an overseer at Nimrod’s tower building. I was
in the ark with Noah. I saw the destruction of Sodom. I was in Africa
before Rome was built. I came hither to the remains of Troy (i.e., to
Britain, for the mystical progenitor of the Britons boasted a Trojan
parentage). I was with my Lord in the asses’ manger. I comforted Moses in
the Jordan. I was in the firmament with Mary Magdalene. I was endowed with
spirit by the kettle of Ceridwen. I was a harper at Lleon in Lochlyn. I
suffered hunger for the son of the maiden. I was in the white mountains in
the court of Cynvelyn in chains and bondage, a year and a day. I dwelt in
the kingdom of the Trinity [Tri-unity]. It is not known whether my body is
flesh or fish. I was a teacher of the whole world and remain till the day
of judgment on the face of the earth. [Briefly, Taliesin has the ubiquity
of [Symbol: Mercury].] I sat on the shaken chair at Caer Seden [Caer Seden
is probably the unceasingly recurrent cycle of animal life in the center
of the universe.], which continually rotates between the three elements.
Is it not a marvel that it does reflect a single beam?” Gwyddnaw,
astonished at the evolution of the boy, requested another song and
received the answer: “Water has the property of bringing grace; it is
profitable to devote one’s thoughts aright to God; it is good warmly to
pray to God, because the grace which goes out from him cannot be thwarted.
Thrice have I been born; I know how one has to meditate. It is sad that
men do not come to seek all the knowledge of the world, which is collected
in my breast, for I know everything that has been and everything that will
be.” (Nork. Myth. d. Volkss., pp. 662 ff.)

The story of Taliesin closely harmonizes with that of Hermes in the
Smaragdine tablet. Nork makes some interesting observations, which besides
the nature myth interpretation, contains also an allusion to the idea of
spiritual regeneration.

I have already mentioned that the uterus symbol is frequently the body
cavity of a monster. Just as in the previous myth the hero by introversion
gets three marvelous drops, so in the Finnish epic Kalevala, Wäinämöinen
learns three magic words in the belly of a monster, his dead ancestor
Antero Wipunen. The gigantic size of the body of the being that here and
in other myths represents the mother, has an infantile root. The
introverting person, as we know, becomes a child. To the child the adults,
and of course, the mother, are very large. For the adult, who becomes a
child and revives the corresponding images, the mother image may easily
become a giant.

Stekel tells (Spr. d. Tr., p. 429) of a patient whose dreams show uterus
and regeneration phantasies in concealed form, that he, advised of it by
Stekel, mused upon it some minutes and then said, “I must openly confess
to you these conscious phantasies. I was 13 years old when I wished to
become acquainted with an enormously large giantess, in whose body I might
take a walk, and where I could inspect everything. I would then make
myself quite comfortable and easy in the red cavern. I also phantasied a
swing that was hung 10 m. high in the body of this giantess. There I
wanted to swing up and down joyfully.” This patient had carried over the
original proportion of fœtus and mother to his present size. Now that he
was grown up, the body in which he could move had to be the body of a
giantess.

We shall now not be surprised at the flesh mountain Krun of the mandæan
Hibil-Ziwâ saga or similar giant personalities. Hibil-Ziwâ descended into
the world of darkness in order to get the answer to a question (i.e., once
more the treasure in the form of a marvelous word). He applied in vain to
different persons, but always had to go deeper and finally came to Krûn,
from whom he forced the magic word.

The treasure or wonder working name comes from the depths according to the
hermetic cabbalistic conception also. David is supposed to have found at
the digging of the foundation of the temple, the Eben stijjah, Stone of
the Deeps, that unlocked the fountain of the great deep (I Mos., VII, 11,
and VIII, 12) and on which the Sêm ha-mephorás, the outspoken name (of
God) was inscribed. This stone he brought into the holy of holies, and on
it the ark of the covenant was set. Fearless disciples of wisdom entered
at times into the sanctuary and had learned from the stone the name with
its combinations of letters in order to work wonders therewith.

In cases where the uterus is represented by the body cavity of a monster
the rebirth occurs most frequently by a spitting forth. Also the breaking
forth by means of tearing apart the uterus occurs, and in every case it
has the significance of a “powerfully tearing of oneself away,” the
burning of bridges behind one, the final victory over the mother. To the
descent into the underworld (introversion) corresponds, as characteristic
of the subsequent rebirth, the rising to the light with the released
treasure (magic word as above, water of life, as in Ishtar’s hell journey,
etc.).

A frequently used symbol for the released libido is the light, the sun.
Reborn sun figures, in connection with a daily and yearly up and down, are
also quite general. That the released libido appears thus may have several
reasons. External ones, like the life-imparting properties of the sun,
invite comparison. Then the parallel light = consciousness. [Also that
higher or other consciousness that is mediated by the mystic religious
work; for which expressions like illuminate, etc., are sufficiently
significant. On this topic see my essay, Phant. u. Myth. (Jb., II, p.
597).] and also inner reasons, i.e., such as rest upon the actual light
and warmth sensations, which occur, as literature and observations show,
in persons who are devoted to spiritual training. Here the occasion may be
offered to the mystic to utilize for conscious life and action, functions
that hitherto had been unconscious. Of the appearance of light in the
state of introversion, the histories of saints and ecstatics, and the
autobiographies of this kind of men are full. An enormous number of
instances might be given. I shall rest content with recalling that
Mechthildis von Magdeburg has entitled her revelations: “A flowing Light
of my Godhead” (“Ein vliessend Lieht miner Gotheit”), and with adding Jane
Leade’s words: “If any one asks what is the magic power [sought by the
reborn] I answer, ‘It is to be compared to a wonderfully powerful
inspiration to the soul, to a blood, coloring and penetrating and
transmuting the inner life, a concentrating and essentially creative light
and fire flame.’ ”

The Omphalopsychites or Hesychiasts, those monks who dwelt in the Middle
Ages on Mount Athos, were given the following instructions by their Abbot
Simeon: “Sitting alone in private, note and do what I say. Close thy doors
and raise thy spirit from vain and temporal things. Then rest thy beard on
the breast and direct the gaze with all thy soul on the middle of the body
at the navel. [See Note G.] Contract the air passages so as not to breathe
too easily. Endeavor inwardly to find the location of the heart, where all
psychic powers reside. At first thou wilt find darkness and inflexible
density. When, however, thou perseverest day and night, thou wilt,
wonderful to relate, enjoy inexpressible rapture. For then the spirit sees
what it never has recognized; it sees the air between the heart and itself
radiantly beaming.” This light, the hermits declare, is the light of God
that was visible to the young men on Tabor.

Yoga-Sutra (Patanyali, I, 36) says: “Or that sorrowless condition of mind,
full of light (would conduce to samadhi).” And the commentator Manilal
Nabubhai Dvivedi remarks upon this: “The light here referred to is the
light of pure sattva. When the mind is deeply absorbed in that quality,
then, indeed, does this condition of light which is free from all pain
follow. Vachaspatimisra remarks that in the heart there is a lotus-like
form having eight petals and with its face turned downward. One should
raise this up by rechaka (exhalation of the breath) and then meditate upon
it, locating therein the four parts of the pranava, viz., a, u, m, and the
point in their several meanings. When the mind thus meditating falls in
the way of the susumna, it sees a perfect calm light like that of the moor
of the sun, resembling the calm ocean of milk. This is the jyotis, light,
which is the sure sign of complete sattva. Some such practice is here
meant....” The similarity to the instruction of the Abbot Simeon is
evident.

The light and sun symbolism in alchemistic writings is everywhere used;
yet gold also = sun, indeed the same sign [Symbol: Gold] serves for both.
I should like to call attention incidentally to a beautiful use of the sun
symbol in “Amor Proximi,” which differs slightly from the more restricted
gold symbolism. On p. 32 ff. we read: “See Christ is not outside of us,
but he is intimately within us all, but locked up, and in order that he
may unlock that which is locked up in us, did he once become outwardly
visible, as a man such as we are, the hard sin enclosure excepted, and of
this the [Symbol: Gold] in this world is the true copy, which quickly
convinced the heathens from the beginning of the world that God must
become man even as the light of nature has become a body in the [Symbol:
Gold]. Now the [Symbol: Gold] is not alone in the firmament outside of all
other creatures, but it is much more in the center of all creatures but
shut up, but the external [Symbol: Gold] is as a figure of Christ, in that
it unlocks in us the enclosed [Symbol: Gold], as its image and substance,
just as Christ does, through his becoming man, also unlock in us the image
of God. For were this not so, then the sphere of the earth would approach
in vain to the [Symbol: Gold] in order to derive its power from it, and
nothing at all would grow from the accursed [Symbol: earth]. [The symbol
[Symbol: earth] means earth.] So the [Symbol: earth] shows us that
inasmuch as it approaches near to the [Symbol: Gold] it is unlocked, so
we, too, approaching Christ, shall attain again the image of God; then at
the end of time this [Symbol: earth] will be translated into the point of
the sun [in Solis punctum] [Cf. what has been said about the point in the
[Symbol: Gold].];” and still farther on: “Ye see that the [Symbol: earth]
turns to the sun, but the reason ye know not; if the earth had not in the
creation gone out of the Solis punctum, it could not have turned and
yearned according to its magnetic manner, so this turning around shows us
that the world was once renewed, and in its beginning, as [Symbol: Gold]
is punctum; it desires to return, and its rest will be alone in that;
therefore the soul of man is also similarly gone out of the eternally
divine sun, towards which it also yearns....”

Our parable, to which I should like now to revert, appears in a new light.
It would be a waste of time to lead the reader once more through all the
adventures of the wanderer. He again, without difficulty, will find all
the aforesaid elements in the parable, and will readily recognize the
introversion and rebirth. I therefore pick out for further consideration
only a few particular motives of the parable or alchemy which seem to me
to require special elucidation.

We should not forget the singular fact that after the introversion, at the
beginning of the work of rebirth, a deluge occurs. This flood takes place
not merely in the alchemistic process (when the bodies undergo
putrefaction in the vessel and become black), but we see the mythic
deluges coming with unmistakable regularity at the same time, i.e., after
the killing of the original being (separation of the primal parents,
etc.), and before the new creation of the world by the son of God. Stucken
(SAM., p. 123): “We see corroborated ... what I have already emphasized,
that on the appearance of the flood catastrophe the creation of the world
is not yet finished. Even before the catastrophe there was indeed an earth
and life on it, but only after the flood, begins the forming of the
present Cosmos. Thus it is in the germanic Ymir-saga, and in the
Babylonian Tiamat-saga, in the Egyptian and likewise in the Iranian.” What
may the flood be in the psychological sense. Dreams and poetry tell us, in
that they figure the passions in the image of a storm-tossed sea. After
the introversion, whose perils have already been mentioned, there is
always an outbreak of the passions. Not without consequences is the Stone
of the Deeps elevated, which locks the prison of the subterranean powers.
(Cf. Book of Enoch, X, 5, and passim.) The point is to seize the wildly
rushing spirits and to get possession of their powers without injury. The
entire inundation must, in the philosophical vessel, be absorbed by the
bodies that have turned black, and then it works on them for the purpose
of new creation, fructifying them like the floods of water upon the earth.
It does no damage to the materia only then, when it is actually black
(stage of victory). If this happens, it (the materia) is in contrast to
the waters raging over it, like an ocean which suffers no alteration by
the influx of waters. “Like an ocean that continually fills itself and yet
does not overflow its boundaries, even with the inflowing waters, so the
man acquires calm, into whom all desires flow in similar wise, and not he
who wantonly indulges his desire.” (Bhag. Gita, II, 70. Latin: translated
by Schlegel: German [Schroeder].)


    “Wer wie das Meer in das die Wasser strömen
    Das sich anfüllet und doch ruhig dasteht
    Wer so in sich die Wünsche lässt verschwinden,
    Der findet Ruhe—nicht wer ihnen nachgibt.”


Above I have compared the lion of the parable to the Sphinx of Œdipus, and
on the other hand, it appears from later deliberation that it (the lion)
must be the retrogressive element in men, which is to be sacrificed in the
work of purification. Now I find several remarks of Jung (Psychology of
the Unconscious) that mediate very well between both ideas. Even if I do
not care to go so far as to see in the animal only the sexual impelling
powers, but prefer to regard it rather as the titanic part of our
impulses, I find the conception of the author very fortunate. The Sphinx,
that double being, symbolizes the double natured man, to whom his
bestiality still clings. Indeed it is to be taken exactly as a functional
representation of the development of reason out of the impulses (human
head and shoulders growing out of an animal body).

The homunculus motive would likewise have to be regarded in a new light. I
have said that the mystic was his own father; he creates a new man
(himself) out of himself with a merely symbolic mother, therefore with
peculiar self-mastery, without the coöperation of any parents. That means
the same thing as the artificial creation of a man. We recognize therefore
the anagogic significance of the homunculus, the idea of which we found
closely interwoven with alchemy in general. This connection also has not
escaped Jung, though he takes it one-sidedly and draws a too far-reaching
conclusion. He points to the vision of Zosimos, where, in the hollow of
the altar he finds boiling water and men in it, and remarks that this
vision reveals the original sense of alchemy, an original impregnation
magic, i.e., a way in which children could be made without a mother. I
must observe that the hermetic attempt to get back to Adam’s condition has
some of the homunculus phantasy in it. Adam was regarded as androgyne, a
being at once man and woman, but sufficient in himself alone for
impregnation and procreation. Welling says in his Opus mago-cabbalisticum,
“This man Adam was created, as the scripture says, i.e., of the male and
female sex, not two different bodies but one in its essence and two in its
potentiality, for he was the earth Adamah, the red and white [Symbol:
Sulfur] the spiritual [Symbol: Gold] and [Symbol: Silver], the male and
female seed, the dust of the Adamah from Schamajim, and therefore had the
power to multiply himself magically (just as he was celestial) which could
not indeed have been otherwise, unless the essential masculinity and
femininity were dissociated.” I am reminded in this connection that
Mercury is also bisexual; the “materia” must be brought into the
androgynic state “rebis.” The idea of hermaphroditism plays a well known,
important part in mythology also.

                                * * * * *

We have explained why phantasy creations carry two meanings, the
psychoanalytic and the anagogic, apparently fundamentally different, even
contradictory, and yet, on account of their completeness, undeniable. We
have found that the two meanings correspond to two aspects or two
evolutionary phases of a psychic inventory of powers, which are attached
as a unity to symbolic types, because an intro-determination can take
place in connection with the sublimation of the impulses. When we
formulated the problem of the multiple interpretation, we were struck with
the fact that besides the two meanings that were nominally antipodal in
ethical relations, there was a third ethically indifferent, namely, the
natural scientific. Apart from the fact that I have not yet exhausted the
anagogic contents of our material and so must add a number of things in
the following sections, I am confronted with the task of elucidating the
position of the nature myth portion. That will necessarily be done
briefly.

In the case of alchemy the natural scientific content is chemistry (in
some degree connected with physics and cosmology), a fact hardly requiring
proof. The alchemistic chemistry was not, to be sure, scientific in the
strict modern sense. In comparison with our modern attitudes it had so
much mythical blood in it that I could call it a mythologically
apperceiving science, wherein I go a little beyond the very clearly
developed conception of Wilhelm Wundt (Volkerps. Myth. u. Rel.) regarding
mythological apperception, from a desire for a more rigid formulation, but
without losing the peculiar concept of the mythical or giving it the
extension it has acquired with G. F. Lipps. Alchemy’s myth-like point of
view and manner of thinking is paralleled by the fact that it was
dominated by symbolic representation and the peculiarities that go with
it. [The concept of the symbol is here to be taken, of course, in the
wider sense, as in my papers on Symbolbildung (Jb. ps. F., II-IV).]

The choice of a symbol is strongly influenced by what strongly impresses
the mind, what moves the soul, whether joyful or painful, what is of vital
interest, in short, whatever touches us nearly, whether consciously or
unconsciously. This influence is shown even in the commonplace instances,
where the professional or the amateur is betrayed by the manner of
apperceiving one and the same object. Thus the landscape painter sees in a
lake a fine subject, the angler an opportunity to fish, the business man a
chance to establish a sanitarium or a steamboat line, the yachtsman a
place for his pleasure trips, the heat tormented person a chance for a
bath, and the suicide, death. In the symbolic conception of an object,
moreover (which is much more dependent on the unconscious or uncontrolled
stimulation of the phantasy that shapes the symbol), the choice from among
the many possibilities can surely not fall upon such images as are
unsympathetic or uninteresting to the mind. Even if we consciously make
comparisons we think of an example mostly from a favorite and familiar
sphere; when something “occurs” to us there is already evidenced some part
of an unconscious complex. This will become elaborated in the degree that
the phantasy is given free play.

The raw product then, of the symbol-choosing phantasy of the individual
(“raw,” i.e., not covered for publicity with a premeditated varnish) bears
traces of the things that closely concern the person in question. (“Out of
the fulness of the heart the mouth speaketh”—even without premeditation.)
If we now start from a spiritual product which is expressed in symbols
(mythologically apperceived), and whose author we must take to be not an
individual man but many generations or simply mankind, then this product
will, in the peculiarities of the selection of the symbol, conceivably
signify not individual propensities but rather those things that affect
identically the generality of mankind. In alchemy, which as a
mythologically apperceiving science is completely penetrated by symbols,
we regard as remarkable in the selection of symbols, the juxtaposition of
such images as reflect what we have, through psychoanalysis, become
acquainted with, as the “titanic” impulses (Œdipus complex). No wonder!
These very impulses are the ones that we know from psychoanalytic
investigations as those which stand above all individual idiosyncracies.
And if we had not known it, the very circumstances of alchemy would have
taught us.

The familiar scheme of impulses with its “titanic” substratum, which is
necessarily existent in all men (although it may have been in any
particular case extraordinarily sublimated) comes clearly to view in
individual creations of fancy. It must be found quite typically developed,
however, where a multitude of men (fable making mankind) were interested
in the founding, forming, polishing and elaborating of the symbolic
structure. Such creations have transcended the merely personal. An example
of this kind is the “mythological” science of alchemy. That we are
repelled by the retrograde perspective of the types residing in its
symbols (and which often appear quite nakedly) comes from the fact that in
the critic these primal impulse forms have experienced a strong
repression, and that their re-emergence meets a strong resistance
(morality, taste, etc.).

The much discussed elementary types have therefore insinuated themselves
into the body of the alchemistic hieroglyphics, as mankind, confronted
with the riddles of physico-chemical facts, struggled to express a mastery
of them by means of thought. The typical inventory of powers, as an
apperception mass, so to speak, helped to determine the selection of
symbols. A procedure of determination has taken place here similar to that
we might have noticed in the coincidence of material and functional
symbolism in dreams. Here again appears the heuristic value which the
introduction of the concept of the functional categories had for our
problem.

The possibility of deriving the “titanic” and the “anagogic” from the
alchemistic (often by their authors merely chemically intended) allegories
is now easily explained. We can work it out, because it was already put in
there, even if neither in the extreme form of the “titanic” (i.e., the
retrograde aspect), nor in that of the “anagogic” (the progressive
aspect), but in an indeterminate middle stage of the intro-determination.
What gave opportunity for this play of symbolism was an effort of
intelligence directed toward chemistry. The chemical content in alchemy
is, so to speak, what has been purposely striven for, while the rest came
by accident, yet none the less inevitably. So then natural philosophy
appears to be the carrier, or the stalk on which the titanic and the
anagogic symbolism blossoms. Thus it becomes intelligible how the
alchemistic hieroglyphic aiming chiefly at chemistry, adapted itself
through and through to the hermetic anagogic educational goal, so that at
times and by whole groups, alchemy was used merely as a mystical guide
without any reference to chemistry.

What we have found in alchemy we shall now apply to mythology where
analogous relations have been indicated. [The apperception theory here
used should not be confused with the intellectual theory (of Steinthal)
which Wundt (V. Ps., IV2, pp. 50 ff.) criticised as the illusion theory. I
should be more inclined to follow closely the Wundtian conception of the
“mythological apperception” (ibid., pp. 64 ff.) with particular emphasis
on the affective elements that are to work there. With Wundt, the affects
are really the “actual impulse mainsprings” and the most powerful stimuli
of the phantasy (ib., p. 60). “The affects of fear and hope, wish and
desire, love and hate, are the widely disseminated sources of the myth.
They are, of course, continually linked with images. But they are the ones
that first breathe life into these images.” I differ from Wundt in that I
have more definite ideas of the origin of these affects, by which they are
brought into close connection with the frequently mentioned elementary
motives.] Modern investigation of myths has, in my opinion, sufficiently
shown that we are here concerned with a nucleus of natural philosophy
(comprehension of astral and even of meteorological processes, etc.)
around which legendary and historical material can grow. As has been shown
by two fairy tales and as I could have abundantly shown from countless
others, the psychoanalytic and the anagogic interpretations are possible
alongside of the scientific. [We can criticise Hitchcock for having in his
explanations of fairy tales considered them only in their most developed
form, and not bothered about their origin and archaic forms. And as a
matter of fact the more developed forms permit a very much richer anagogic
interpretation than the archaic. But that is no proof against the
interpretation, but only establishes their orientation in the development
of the human spirit. The anagogic interpretation is indeed a prospective
explanation in the sense of an ethical advance. Now the evolution even of
fairy tales shows quite clearly a progression towards the ethical; and
inasmuch as the ethical content of the tale grows by virtue of this
evolution, the anagogic explanation is in the nature of things able to
place itself in higher developed tales in correspondingly closer
connection with mythical material.] I adduce here only one example, namely
the schema that Frobenius has derived from the comparison of numerous sun
myths. The hero is swallowed by a water monster in the west [the sun sets
in the sea]. The animal journeys with him to the east (night path of the
sun apparently under the sea). He lights a fire in the belly of the animal
and cuts off a piece of the pendant heart when he feels hungry. Soon after
he notices that the fish is running aground. (The reillumined sun comes up
to the horizon from below.) He begins immediately to cut his way out of
the animal, and then slips out (sunrise). In the belly of the fish it has
become so hot that all his hair has fallen out. (Hair probably signifies
rays.) Quite as clear as the nature myth purport, is the fact that we have
a representation of regeneration, which is quite as conceivable in
psychoanalytic as in anagogic explanation.

Now I cannot approve of the attempt of many psychoanalysts to treat as a
negligible quantity or to ignore altogether the scientific content (nature
nucleus) of the myths which has been so well substantiated by the newer
research, even though it is not so well established in the details. [I
have uttered a similar warning in Jb. ps. F., IV (Princip. Anreg.) and
previously, in Jb. ps. F., II (Phant. u. Myth), have advocated the
equality of the natural philosophical and the psychological content. Now I
observe with pleasure that very recently an author of the psychoanalytic
school is engaged on the very subject that I have recommended as so
desirable. Dr. Emil F. Lorenz, in the February number of _Imago_, 1913,
treats the “Titan Motiv in der allgemeinen Mythologie” in a manner that
approaches my conception of it. In the consideration of human primal
motives as apperception mass, there is particularly revealed a common
thought in the primitive interpretation of natural phenomenon.
Unfortunately the article appeared after this book was finished. So even
if I am not in a position to enter into this question, I will none the
less refer to it and at the same time express the hope that Lorenz will
further elaborate the interesting preliminary contribution, communicated
in the form of aphorisms, as he terms it.] The inadmissibility of these
omissions arises from the vital importance and gripping effect of the
objects thus (i.e., mythologically) regarded by humanity (e.g., of the
course of the sun, so infinitely important for them in their dependence
upon the moods of nature). If then, on the one hand, it will not be
possible for the psychoanalyst to force the nature mythologist out of his
position and somehow to prove that any symbol means not the sun but the
father, so on the other hand the nature mythologist who may understand his
own interpretations so admirably, must not attack the specifically
psychological question: why in the apperception of an object, this and not
that symbolic image offers itself to consciousness. So, for instance, why
the sunset and sunrise is so readily conceived as a swallowing and
eructation, or as a process of regeneration. Yet Frobenius (Zeitalt. d.
Sonneng., I, p. 30) finds the symbolism “negligible.”

It is also conceivable that the obtrusive occurrence of incest, castration
of the father, etc., should make the mythologists ponder. It was bias on
the part of many of them to be unwilling to see the psychological value of
these things. I must therefore acknowledge the justice of Rank’s view when
he (Inz-Mot., p. 278) says in reference to the Œdipus myth (rightly, in
all probability, interpreted by Goldziher as a sun myth): “Yet it is
indubitable that these ideas of incest with the mother and the murder of
the father are derived from human life, and that the myth in this human
disguise could never be brought down from heaven without a corresponding
psychic idea, which may really have been an unconscious one even at the
time of the formation of the myth, just as it is with the mythologists of
today.”

And in another passage (pp. 318 ff.): “While these investigators (astral
and moon mythologists) would consider incest and castration operative in
an equal or even greater degree than we do, as the chief motives in the
formation of myths in the celestial examples only, we are forced by
psychoanalytical considerations to find in them universal primitive human
purposes which later, as a result of the need of psychological
justification, have been projected into the heavens from which our myth
interpreters wish in turn to derive them. [Whether such a need of
justification has had a share in the formation of myths appears to me
doubtful or at any rate not demonstrable. At all events in so strongly
emphasizing these unnecessary assumptions and conceiving the projection
upon heaven of the mundane psychological primal motives as an act of
release, we hide the more important cause for concerning ourselves with
heaven, namely the already mentioned vital importance of the things that
are accomplished there. Now the fact that the primal motives cooperate in
the symbolical realization of these things, implies no defense directed
against them. A better defense would be to repress them in symbolism than,
as really happens, to utilize them in it.] These interpreters, for
example, have believed that they recognized in the motive of dismemberment
(castration) a symbolic suggestion of the gradual waning of the moon,
while the reverse is for us undoubted, namely, that the offensive
castration has found a later symbolization in the moon phases. Yet it
argues either against all logic and psychology, or for our conception of
the sexualization of the universe, that man should have symbolized so
harmless a phenomenon as the changes of the moon, by so offensive a one as
the dismemberment or castration of the nearest relative. So the nature
mythologists also, and Siecke in particular, have thought that primitive
man has ‘immediately regarded’ the (to him) incomprehensible waning of the
moon as a dismemberment, while this is psychologically quite unthinkable
unless this image, which is taken from earthly life, should have likewise
originated in human life and thought (phantasy).”

It is indeed never conceivable that men would have chosen for the natural
phenomenon exactly these titanic symbols, if these had not had for them a
special psychic value, and therefore touched them closely. If any one
should object that they would not have “chosen” them (because they did not
purposely invent allegories, as was formerly thought), I should raise the
contrary question: Who has chosen them? I will stick to the word “choose”
for a choice has taken place. But the powers that arranged this choice
lived and still live in the soul of man.

The conception advocated by me gives their due to the nature mythologists
just as much as to the psychologists that oppose them. It reinstates,
moreover, a third apparently out-worn tendency [the so-called degeneration
theory] that sees in the myth the veiling of ancient priestly wisdom. This
obsolete view had the distinction that it placed some value, which the
modern interpreters did not, on the anagogic content of the myths (even if
in a wrong perspective). The necessity of reckoning with an anagogic
content of myths results from the fact that religions with their ethical
valuations, have developed from mythical beginnings. And account must be
taken of these relations. In the way in which the older interpretations of
myths regarded the connection, they pursued a phantom, but their point of
view becomes serviceable as soon as it reverses the order of evolution. It
is not true that the religious content in myths was the priestly wisdom of
antiquity, but rather that it became such at the end of the development.
My conception shows further that the utmost significance for the
recognition and comparison of the motives (corresponding to the
psychological types) attaches to the material so brilliantly reconstructed
by Stucken and other modern investigators, but not the convincing evidence
which some think they find there for the migration theory, as against the
theory of elementary thoughts.

With regard to the possibly repellent impression derived from the notion
of an unconscious thought activity of the myth forming phantasy, I should
like to close with these words of Karl Otfried Müller: “It is possible
that the concept of unconsciousness in the formation of myths will appear
obscure to many, even mysterious ... but is history not to acknowledge the
strange also, when unprejudiced investigation leads to it?”
