
## [HOME](scrolls/home)

# notes
 NOTES.


Note A (80). I put here not merely those comparisons of motives which are
alike at the beginning, but also those that are important for our further
consideration. My rendering of them is partly abridged. Signs of
similarity are, as Stucken explains, not employed to express an absolute
congruence, but predominantly in the sense of “belongs with” or “or is the
alternate of.” Stucken’s comparison I, A, goes: Moses in the ark = spark
of fire in the ark = Pandora’s books = Eve’s apple; I, B: Moses in the ark
= the exposed = the fatherless = the persecuted = the deluge hero [the one
floating in the ark]. II, A: Eve’s apple = Moses in the ark = Onan’s seed
= fire = soma = draught of knowledge, etc. III, B: Tearing open of the
womb = decapitation or dismemberment = exposure = separation of the first
parents. IV, B: The dismembered [man or woman] = the rejuvenated = the
reborn [m. or w.]. VI, A: Potiphar motive = separation of first parents =
Onan motive. VII, A: The wicked stepmother = Potiphar’s wife = man eater.
VII, B: Flight from the “man eater” = flight from Potiphar’s wife = flight
from the wicked stepmother = separation of the first parents = magic
flight. IX, A: The first parents = magic flight. IX, A: The killed ram =
Thor’s ram = Thyestes’ meal = soma. XIII, A: The exposed = the persecuted
= the dismembered child = the slain ram—the helpful animal. XIX: The Uriah
letter = the changed letter = word violence [curse = blessing]. XX:
Scapegoat = ark. XXVIII: Wrestling match = rape of women = rape of soma =
opening of the chest [opening of the hole] = rape of the garments [of the
bathing swan ladies]. XXIX: Castration = tearing asunder [consuming] of
the mother’s body = the final conflagration = the deluge. XXXIII, A:
Dragonfight = wrestling match = winning of the offered king’s daughter =
rape of the women = rape of fire = deluge. XL, A: Incest motive = Potiphar
motive. XL, B: Incest = violation of a [moral] prohibition. XL, C: Seducer
[male or female] to incest = “man-eater.” XLIV, A: The father who rejects
the daughter = “man eater.” XLIV, B: Separation of the first parents =
refusal of the daughter [refusal of the “king’s daughter” promised to the
dragon fighter] = substitution. XLV, A: Sodomy = substitution = rape =
parthenogenesis = marriage of mortal with the immortal = seduction =
adultery = incest = love = embraces of the first parents = wrestling
match. Otherwise is marriage of mortal with the immortal = incest =
separation of the first parents. (SAM Book 5.)

Note B (128). That the ideas of gold and offal lie very near each other is
shown in numerous forms and variations in myth, fairy tale and popular
superstition. I mention above all the figure of the ducat or gold-dropper
which has probably been attenuated from a superstition to a joke, and
around it are gathered such expressions as “he has gold like muck,” “he
must have a gold dropper at his house”; then the description of bloody
hemorrhoids as golden veins; the fabulous animals that produce as
excrement gold and precious things. Here belong also the golden ass [K. H.
M., No. 36], which at the word “Bricklebrit” begins “to spew gold from
before and behind,” or [Pentam., No. 1], at the command, “arre cacaure,”
gives forth gold, pearls and diamonds as a priceless diarrhea. [Arre is a
word of encouragement like our get-up; cacuare is derived naturally from
cacare, kacken = to cack, perhaps with an echo of aurum, oro, gold.] It
occurs frequently in sagas that animal dung, e.g., horse manure, is
changed into gold as, inversely, gold sent by evil spirits is easily
turned [again] into dung. Gold is, in the ancient Babylonian way of
thinking, which passes over into many myths, muck of hell or the under
world. If a man buried a treasure so that no one should find it, he does
well to plant a cactus on the covered [treasure] as a guardian of the
gold, according to an old magical custom. An attenuation of the comparison
dung = gold seems to be coal = gold. In Stucken we find the comparison
excrement = Rheingold = sperm [S. A. M., p. 262] and connected with it
[pp. 266 ff.] a mass of material mythologically connected with it. I
mention the similar parallels derived from dream analysis (Stekel, Spr. d.
Tr., passim), further in particular the psychologically interesting
contributions of Freud on “Anal character” (Kl. Schr., pp. 132 ff.) like
Rank’s contribution. (Jb. ps. F., IV, pp. 55 ff.)

Note C (280). According to Jung it is a characteristic of the totality of
the sun myth which relates that the “fundamental basis of the ‘incestuous’
desire is not equivalent to cohabitation, but to the peculiar idea of
becoming a child again, to return to the parents’ protection, to get back
into the mother again in order to be born again by the mother. On the way
to this goal stands incest, however, i.e., necessity in some way to get
back into the uterus again. One of the simplest ways was to fructify the
mother and procreate oneself again. Here the prohibition against incest
steps in, so now the sun myths and rebirth myths teem with all possible
proposals as to how one could encompass incest. A very significant way of
encompassing it is to change the mother into another being or rejuvenate
her, in order to make her vanish after the resulting birth [respective
propagation], i.e., to cause her to change herself back. It is not
incestuous cohabitation that is sought, but rebirth, to which one might
attain quickest by cohabitation. This, however, is not the only way,
although perhaps the original one.” (Jung, Jb. ps. F., IV, pp. 266 ff.) In
another place it is said: The separation of the son from the mother
signifies the separation of man from the pairing consciousness of animals,
from the lack of individual consciousness characteristic of infantile
archaic thought. “First by the force of the incest prohibition could a
self-conscious individual be produced, who had before been, thoughtlessly
one with the genus, and only so first could the idea of the individual and
conclusive death be rendered possible. So came, as it were, death into the
world through Adam’s sin. The neurotic who cannot leave his mother has
good reason; fear of death holds him there. It appears that there is no
concept and no word strong enough to express the meaning of this conflict.
Whole religions are built to give value to the magnitude of this conflict.
This struggle for expression, enduring thousands of years, cannot have the
source of its power in the condition which is quite too narrowly conceived
by the common idea of incest; much more apparently must we conceive the
law that expresses itself first and last as a prohibition against incest
as a compulsion toward domestication, and describe the religious system as
an institution that most of all takes up the cultural aims of the not
immediately serviceable impulsive powers of the animal nature, organizes
them and gradually makes them capable of sublimated employment.” (Jb. ps.
F., IV, pp. 314 ff.)

Note D (274). Jung divides the libido into two currents lengthwise, one
directed forward, the other backward: “As the normal libido is like a
constant stream, which pours its waters into the world of reality, so the
resistance, dynamically regarded, is not like a rock raised in the river
bed, which is flowed over and around by the stream, but like a back
current flowing towards the source instead of towards the mouth. A part of
the soul probably wants the external object, another part, however,
prefers to return to the subjective world, whither the airy and easily
built palaces of the phantasy beckon. We could assume this duality of
human will, for which Bleuler from his psychiatric standpoint has coined
the word ambitendency, as something everywhere and always existing, and
recall that even the most primitive of all motor impulses are already
contradictory as where, e.g., in the act of extension, the flexor muscles
are innervated.” (Jb. ps. F., IV, p. 218.)

Note E (279). Of the wonderful abilities that pass current as fruits of
the yoga practice, the eight grand powers [Maha-siddhi] are generally
mentioned: 1. To make oneself small or invisible [animan], 2, 3. to
acquire the uttermost lightness or heaviness [laghiman, gariman], 4. to
increase to the size of a monster and to reach everything even the most
distant, as e.g., to the moon with the tips of the fingers [mahiman or
prapti], 5. unobstructed fulfillment of all wishes, e.g., the wish to sink
into the earth as into water and to emerge again [prakamya], 6. perfect
control over the body and the internal organs [isitva], 7. the ability to
change the course of nature [vasitva], and 8. by mere act of will to place
oneself anywhere [yatra kamavasayitva]. Besides these eight marvelous
powers many others might be named, which are partly included in the above;
such an exaltation of sensitiveness that the most remote and imperceptible
images, the happenings in other worlds on planets and stars, as also the
goings on in one’s own interior and in other men’s are perceived by the
senses; the knowledge of the past and the future, of previous existences
and of the hour of death; understanding the language of animals, the
ability to summon the dead, etc. These miraculous powers, however, suffer
from the disadvantages of being transitory, like everything else won by
man through his merit—with the exception of salvation. (Garbe, Samkhya and
Yoga, p. 46.)

Note F (305). Jung (Jb., Ill, p. 171) refers to Maeterlinck’s “inconscient
supérieur” (in “La Sagesse et la Destinée”) as a prospective potentiality
of subliminal combinations. He comments on it as follows: “I shall not be
spared the reproach of mysticism. Perhaps the matter should none the less
be pondered: doubtless the unconscious contains the psychological
combinations that do not reach the liminal value of consciousness.
Analysis resolves these combinations into their historical determinants
for that is one of the essential tasks of analysis, i.e., to render
powerless by disconnecting them, the obsessions of the complexes that are
concurrent with the purposeful conduct of life. History is ignorant of two
kinds of things: what is hidden in the past and what is hidden in the
future. Both are probably to be attained with a certain measure of
probability, the former as a postulate, the latter as a historical
prognosis. In so far as to-morrow is contained in to-day, and all the warp
of the future already laid, a deepened knowledge of the present could make
possible a more or less wide-reaching and sure prognosis of the future. If
we transfer this reasoning, as Kant has already done, to the psychologic,
the following things must result; just as memory traces, which have
demonstrably become subliminal, are still accessible to the unconscious,
so also are certain very fine subliminal combinations showing a forward
tendency, which are of the greatest possible significance for future
occurrences in so far as the latter are conditioned by our psychology. But
just as the science of history troubles itself little about the future
combinations which are rather the object of politics, just so little are
the psychological combinations the object of the analysis, but would be
rather the object of an infinitely refined psychological synthesis, which
should know how to follow the natural currents of the libido. We cannot do
this, but probably the unconscious can, for the process takes place there,
and it appears as if from time to time in certain cases significant
fragments of this work, at least in dreams, come to light, whence came the
prophetic interpretation of dreams long claimed by superstition. The
aversion of the exact [sciences] of to-day against that sort of
thought-process which is hardly to be called phantastic is only an
overcompensation of the thousands of years old but all too great
inclination of man to believe in soothsaying.”

Note G (317). The umbilical region plays no small part as a localization
point for the first inner sensations in mystic introversion practices. The
accounts of the Hindu Yoga doctrine harmonize with the experiences of the
omphalopsychites. Staudenmaier thinks that he has, in his investigations
into magic, which partly terminated in the calling up of extremely
significant hallucinations, observed that realistic heavenly or religious
hallucinations take place only if the “specific” nerve complexes [of the
vegetative system] are stimulated as far down as the peripheral tracts in
the region of the small intestine. (Magie als exp. Naturw., p. 123.) Many
visionary authors know how to relate marvels of power to the region of the
stomach and of the solar plexus. In an essay on the seat of the soul, J.
B. van Helmont assures us that there is a stronger feeling in the upper
orifice of the stomach than in the eye itself, etc.; that the solar plexus
is the most essential organ of the soul. He recounts the following
experience. In order to make an experiment on poisonous herbs he made a
preparation of the root of aconite [Aconitum napellus] and only tasted it
with the tip of his tongue without swallowing any of it. “Immediately,” he
says, “my skin seemed to be constricted as with a bandage, and soon after,
there occurred an extraordinary thing, the like of which I had never
experienced before. I noticed with astonishment that I felt, perceived and
thought no longer with my head, but in the region of my stomach, as if
knowledge had taken its seat in the stomach. Amazed at this unusual
phenomenon, I questioned myself and examined myself carefully. I merely
convinced myself that my power of perception was now much stronger and
more comprehensive. The spiritual clearness was coupled with great
pleasure. I did not sleep nor dream, I was still temperate and my health
perfect. I was at times in raptures, but they had nothing in common with
the fact of feeling with the stomach, which excluded all coöperation with
the head. Meantime my joy was interrupted by the anxiety that this might
even bring on some derangement. Only my belief in God and my resignation
to his will soon destroyed this fear. This condition lasted two hours,
after which I had several attacks of giddiness. I have since often tried
to taste of aconite, but I could not get the same result.” (Van Helmont,
Ortus Medic, p. 171, tr. Ennemoser, Gesch. d. Mag., p. 913.)

Note H (381). For the old as for the new royal art the material is man, as
man freed from all framework. “Not man of the conventional social life,
but man as the equally entitled and equally obligated being of divine
creation, enters the temple of humanity with the obligation always to
remain conscious of his duty and to put aside everything that comes up to
hinder the fulfillment of the highest duty.” (R. Fischer.) Compare with
this what Hitchcock says of the material of the Philosopher’s Stone:
“Although men are of diverse dispositions ... yet the alchemists insist
... that all the nations of men are of one blood, that is, of one nature;
and that character in man, by which he is one nature, it is the special
object of alchemy to bring into life and action, by means of which, if it
could universally prevail, mankind would be constituted into a
brotherhood.” (H. A., pp. 48 ff.) [The tests] ... “begin with the
stripping of the metals. Now alchemy recommends, once the propitious
matter is seen, carefully examined and recognized, to clean it externally
for the purpose of freeing it of every foreign body that could adhere
accidentally to its surface. The matter, in fine, should be reduced to
itself. Now it is an absolutely analogous matter that the candidate is
called to strip himself of everything that he possesses artificially; both
it and he ought to be reduced strictly to themselves. In this state of
primitive innocence, of philosophic candor retrieved, the subject is
imprisoned in a narrow retreat where no external light can penetrate. This
is the chamber of meditation which corresponds to the matras of the
alchemist, to his philosophic egg hermetically sealed. The uninitiated
finds there a dark tomb where he must voluntarily die to his former
existence. By decomposing the integuments that are opposed to the true
expansion of the germ of individuality, this symbolic death precedes the
birth of the new being who is to be initiated.” (W. S. H., pp. 87 ff.)

Note I (411). As to the Chamber of the Companion hung in red, it
represents the sphere of action of our individuality, measured by the
extent of our sulphurous radiation. This radiation produces a kind of
refractive [refringent] medium, which refracts the surrounding diffused
light [[Symbol: Mercury] is meant] to concentrate it on the spiritual
nucleus of the subject. Such is the mechanism of the illumination, by
which those benefit who have seen the blazing star shine. Every being
bears in himself this mysterious star, but too often in the condition of a
dim spark hardly perceptible. It is the philosophic child, the immanent
Logos or the Christ incarnate, which legend represents as born obscurely
in the midst of the filth of a cave serving as a stable. The initiation
becomes the vestal of this inner fire [Symbol: Sulfur]; archetype or
principle of all individuality. She knows how to care for it as long as it
is brooded in the ashes. Then she devotes herself to nourishing it
judiciously, to render it keen for the moment when it finally should
overcome the obstacles that imprison it and seek to hold it in isolation.
It means, as a matter of fact, that the Son is put en rapport with the
external [Symbol: Mercury], or in other words, that the individual enters
into communion with the collectivity from which he comes.

